# `learnlatex.org`: A place to learn LaTeX online

## Introduction

LaTeX is a great system for producing technical documents, but as it is not a
word processor, there is an entry barrier. In many ways, learning LaTeX is like
learning a 'real' programming language: we have input ('code') and run
('compile') to get output. It's not surprising, therefore, that we might look at
how people learn those 'real' programming languages and want to provide similar
tools. A quick search will show that while books remain important resources,
interactive web-based training is the first contact many users have with a whole
range of programming tools. The [[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org)
project was born out of the desire to provide the same easy-to-access approach
for LaTeX beginners.

## Good starting points

Before we worry about the technical detail of providing online lessons, there is
a much more important question: what should be in those lessons. Luckily, the
people  behind [[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) already had some
experience in that: in particular, Nicola Talbot had already developed [a
collection of excellent LaTeX
resources](https://www.dickimaw-books.com/latexresources.html).

Building on these, we started constructing a curriculum. The aim is to get users
_started_ with LaTeX, not to tell them everything. There's a tricky balance, and
so [[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) splits out the lessons into a
core set of 16 ideas plus a parallel set of 'going further' pages.

The central idea is to get people started with one of the most common LaTeX
tasks: writing an academic document such as an article or report. So the topics
start with simple LaTeX structure, cover things like including images and move
on to long documents and bibliographies. We do cover math mode, but  done' go
into a lot of detail: yes, math mode is a core LaTeX strength, but  for many
users, mathematics is just scary.

We don't expect to cover everything in one go, so we finish with perhaps the
most important lesson: where to look next and get more help!

## Keeping it current

There are lots of LaTeX resources online, but over time things change and a lot
of those web pages don't get updated. The team behind
[[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) include several active members of
[The LaTeX Project](https://www.latex-project.org), which means there is real
expertise in how LaTeX works best _today_. The site is also hosted on an open
system: [GitHub Pages](https://www.github.com). That lets anyone log an issue or
suggest an improvement. So the site will stay current, and we can expect users
to get the best possible advice on reliable and readable LaTeX documents.

## Using LaTeX online

Existing users of Overleaf will need no introduction to the idea of using a full
LaTeX system in the browser. That's great for lots of reasons, but for beginners
the biggest advantage is they can try LaTeX out without having to install
anything.

On [[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) we currently offer a couple of
ways of using the examples online. We've set them up so you can open in
Overleaf, but also provide a lightweight set up where they run directly in the
web page. This method means there's no need to leave the site, or to log in
anywhere. Of course,  it means that you can't _save_ your changes, but when
trying out ideas that  is perhaps not a bad thing!

None of that ties anyone to the site, of course. The examples are plain text and
can be copied and pasted into an editor. We tell people how to set up their
system with a LaTeX installation, we just don't expect that everyone will. So
users can learn online, then take which route they prefer and apply the skills
they've picked up.

## Speaking your language

When you are learning something new, it's nice to have instructions in your own
language, even if you speak another one. For LaTeX, like a lot of technical
systems, there is a _lot_ of information in English. On
[[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org), we currently have seven different
languages available: the core team do write the lessons first in English, but
translations have been created into for example Spanish and Marathi.

There's also language-specific stuff you need to think about when you are using
LaTeX: different languages come with different typographic traditions. So each
translation has it's own dedicated pages to highlight what you might need to
know about specific to the language you are writing (and reading!) in.

## Conclusions

On [[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org), we have set up a site that is
up-to-date both in it's content and web design, and provides multiple ways to
try LaTeX out. There's a structured approach to the lessons, with more detail
for those who need it. It's ready to use now in seven languages, with more
translations underway. We hope it will soon be one of _the_ places that new
LaTeX users look to get started.
