# `learnlatex.org`: A place to learn LaTeX online

## Introduction

LaTeX needs no introduction here: it is a document preparation system designed
to work well for producing high-quality output for a massive range of uses. As
LaTeX is about taking input and converting it to output by typesetting, it's
somewhat like writing a program: a description of how the document should look.
That means the learning curve for LaTeX is similar to that for learning a
programming language.

There are many excellent books about learning LaTeX, but notice that interactive
web-based training is the first contact many users have with a whole range of
programming tools. The [learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) project was
born out of the desire to provide the same easy-to-access approach for LaTeX
beginners.

## Good starting points

Before we worry about the technical detail of providing online lessons, there is
a much more important question: what should be in those lessons. Luckily, the
team behind [learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) already had some
experience in that: in particular, Nicola Talbot had already developed [a
collection of excellent LaTeX
resources](https://www.dickimaw-books.com/latexresources.html).

Building on these, we started constructing a curriculum. The aim is to get users
_started_ with LaTeX, not to tell them everything. There's a tricky balance, and
so [learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) splits out the lessons into a
core set of 16 ideas plus a parallel set of 'going further' pages.

The central idea is to get people started with one of the most common LaTeX
tasks: writing an academic document such as an article or report. So the topics
start with simple LaTeX structure, cover things like including images and move
on to long documents and bibliographies. We do cover math mode, but don't go
into a lot of detail: yes, math mode is a core LaTeX strength, but for many
users, mathematics is just scary.

We don't expect to cover everything in one go, so we finish with perhaps the
most important lesson: where to look next and get more help!

## Keeping it current

There are lots of LaTeX resources online, but over time things change and a lot
of those web pages don't get updated. As
[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) is closely linked to the LaTeX
Project, there is real expertise in how LaTeX works best _today_. The site is
also hosted on an open system: [GitHub Pages](https://www.github.com). That lets
anyone log an issue or suggest an improvement. So the site will stay current,
and we can expect users to get the best possible advice on reliable and readable
LaTeX documents.

## Using LaTeX online

On [learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org) we currently offer a couple of
ways of using the examples online.  We provide a lightweight set up where
examples run directly in the web page. This method means there's no need to
leave the site, or to log in anywhere. Of course,  it means that you can't
_save_ your changes, but when trying out ideas that  is perhaps not a bad thing!
For people who want to work online in a more permanent set up, we've set it up so
you can open the examples in [Overleaf](https://www.overleaf.com).

None of that ties anyone to the site, of course. The examples are plain text and
can be copied and pasted into an editor. We tell people how to set up their
system with a LaTeX installation, we just don't expect that everyone will. So
users can learn online, then take which route they prefer and apply the skills
they've picked up.

## Speaking your language

When you are learning something new, it's nice to have instructions in your own
language, even if you speak another one. For LaTeX, like a lot of technical
systems, there is a _lot_ of information in English. On
[learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org), we currently have seven different
languages available: the core team write the lessons first in English, but
translations have been created into for example German and Vietnamese.

There's also language-specific stuff you need to think about when you are using
LaTeX: different languages come with different typographic traditions. So each
translation has its own dedicated pages to highlight what you might need to
know about specific to the language you are writing (and reading!) in.

## Conclusions

On [learnlatex.org](https://www.learnlatex.org), we have set up a site that is
up-to-date both in its content and web design, and provides multiple ways to
try LaTeX out. There's a structured approach to the lessons, with more detail
for those who need it. It's ready to use now in seven languages, with more
translations underway. We hope it will soon be one of _the_ places that new
LaTeX users look to get started.
